Streaming lists documentation (#39993)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/reference/using-api/api-concepts.md

assume bookmarks are returned at any specific interval, nor can clients assume that
the API server will send any `BOOKMARK` event even when requested.

## Streaming lists

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.27" state="alpha" >}}

On large clusters, retrieving the collection of some resource types may result in
a significant increase of resource usage (primarily RAM) on the control plane.
In order to alleviate its impact and simplify the user experience of the **list+watch**

> pattern, we added a support for requesting the initial state (previously requested via

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pattern, Kubernetes - including version {{< skew currentVersion >}}- provides alpha support for requesting the
initial state (which you would otherwise request separately via
```

Howe about

the **list** request) as part of the **watch** request.

Provided that the `WatchList` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/)

> is enabled, this can be achieved by specifying `SendInitialEvents=true` parameter

Reviewer: Is this right?
```suggestion
is enabled, this can be achieved by specifying `sendInitialEvents=true` as query string parameter
```

in a watch request. If set, the server starts the watch stream with synthetic init
events to build the whole state of all existing objects followed by a `BOOKMARK` event

> (if requested via `allowWatchBookmarks=true` option) containing a ResourceVersion after

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(if requested via `allowWatchBookmarks=true` option) containing a resource version after
```

which the server continue streaming events.

> When `SendInitialEvents` option is set, we require `ResourceVersionMatch` to be set

Author: Yes - fixed

to `NotOlderThan`. If the provided `ResourceVersion` is unset, this is interpreted

> as **consistent read** and the bookmark event is send when the state is synced at

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as **consistent read** and the bookmark event is sent when the state is synced at
```

> as **consistent read** and the bookmark event is sent when the state is synced at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as a request for _consistent read_; the bookmark event is sent when the state is synced at
```

> as a request for __consistent read__; the bookmark event is sent when the state is synced at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as a request for _consistent read_; the bookmark event is sent when the state is synced at
```
(per the [style guide](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/))

least to the moment of a consistent read from when the request started to be

> processed. If the provided `ResourceVersion` is set, the bookmark event is send when

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
processed. If the provided `ResourceVersion` is set, the bookmark event is sent when
```

> processed. If the provided `ResourceVersion` is set, the bookmark event is sent when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
processed. If you specify a `resourceVersion` (in the query string), the bookmark event is sent once
```

the state is synced at least to the provided resource version.

As an example imagine a case when the current resource version is 10245 and there

> exist two pod: `foo` and `bar`. Then sending the following request could result

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
exist two pods: `foo` and `bar`. Then sending the following request could result
```

in the following sequence of events:

```console

> GET /api/v1/namespaces/test/pods?watch=1&sendInitialEvents=true&allowWatchBookmarks=true&resourceVersion=&resourceVersionMatch=NotOlderThan

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GET /api/v1/namespaces/test/pods?watch=1&sendInitialEvents=true&allowWatchBookmarks=true&resourceVersionMatch=NotOlderThan
```
?

Author: I consciously made that explicit here - I think it brings some value.

Reviewer: In the text, consider explaining what that means. We could well have readers who don't know the nuances of HTTP query string conventions.

Author: done

---
200 OK
Transfer-Encoding: chunked
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "type": "ADDED",
  "object": {"kind": "Pod", "apiVersion": "v1", "metadata": {"resourceVersion": "8467", "name": "foo"}, ...}
}
{
  "type": "ADDED",
  "object": {"kind": "Pod", "apiVersion": "v1", "metadata": {"resourceVersion": "5726", "name": "bar"}, ...}
}
{
  "type": "BOOKMARK",
  "object": {"kind": "Pod", "apiVersion": "v1", "metadata": {"resourceVersion": "10245"} }
}
...
<followed by regular watch stream starting from resourceVersion="10245">
```

> 

Reviewer: We don't explain why `watch` is set to `1` but `sendInitialEvent` and `allowWatchBookmarks` are set to true. Does the API let us use a consistent value (eg `true`) for all three?

Author: We can set all to true.

I was copy-pasting from other calls in this page - I think it would be even more confusing to have watch=1 in some places and watch=true in other places in this doc.

I'm all for unifying it, but let's do that in a separate PR.

Reviewer: Sure.

assume bookmarks are returned at any specific interval, nor can clients assume that
the API server will send any `BOOKMARK` event even when requested.

## Streaming lists

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.27" state="alpha" >}}

On large clusters, retrieving the collection of some resource types may result in
a significant increase of resource usage (primarily RAM) on the control plane.
In order to alleviate its impact and simplify the user experience of the **list** + **watch**
pattern, Kubernetes - including version {{< skew currentVersion >}} - provides alpha support
for requesting the initial state (previously requested via the **list** request) as part of
the **watch** request.

Provided that the `WatchList` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/)
is enabled, this can be achieved by specifying `sendInitialEvents=true` as query string parameter
in a watch request. If set, the server starts the watch stream with synthetic init
events to build the whole state of all existing objects followed by a `BOOKMARK` event

> (if requested via `allowWatchBookmarks=true` option) containing a resource version after
> which the server continue streaming events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(if requested via `allowWatchBookmarks=true` in the query string). The bookmark event includes the
resource version for that watch bookmark. After sending the bookmark event, the API server continues
as for any other **watch** response.
```

> When `sendInitialEvents=true` in the query string is set, we require `ResourceVersionMatch` to be set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you set `sendInitialEvents=true` in the query string, Kubernetes also requires that you set
`resourceVersionMatch`
```

> to `NotOlderThan`. If the provided `ResourceVersion` is unset, this is interpreted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to `NotOlderThan`. If you specify `resourceVersion` in the query string without providing a value,
Kubernetes interprets this
```

as a request for _consistent read_; the bookmark event is sent when the state is synced at
least to the moment of a consistent read from when the request started to be

> processed. If you specify `resourceVersion` (in the query string), the bookmark event is sent when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
processed. If you specify `resourceVersion` and do provide a value, the bookmark event is sent when
```

the state is synced at least to the provided resource version.

> As an example imagine a case when the current resource version is 10245 and there

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Example {#example-streaming-lists}

An example : a collection of Pods. For that collection, the current resource version is 10245 and there
```

assume bookmarks are returned at any specific interval, nor can clients assume that
the API server will send any `BOOKMARK` event even when requested.

## Streaming lists

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.27" state="alpha" >}}

On large clusters, retrieving the collection of some resource types may result in
a significant increase of resource usage (primarily RAM) on the control plane.
In order to alleviate its impact and simplify the user experience of the **list** + **watch**
pattern, Kubernetes - including version {{< skew currentVersion >}} - provides alpha support
for requesting the initial state (previously requested via the **list** request) as part of
the **watch** request.

Provided that the `WatchList` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/)
is enabled, this can be achieved by specifying `sendInitialEvents=true` as query string parameter

> in a **watch** request. If set, the API server starts the watch stream with synthetic init

Reviewer 3: > synthetic init events

Are these always `type: ADDED`? Maybe add a note about that here.

Author: yes - added

> events to build the whole state of all existing objects followed by a `BOOKMARK` event

Reviewer 3: Add an anchor link to `#watch-bookmarks` here.

(if requested via `allowWatchBookmarks=true` option). The bookmark event includes the resource for that

> watch bookmark. After sending the bookmark event, the API server continues as for any other **watch**

Reviewer 3: > The bookmark event includes the resource for that watch bookmark

What does this mean?

> watch bookmark. After sending the bookmark event, the API server continues as for any other **watch**

Reviewer 3: Is the apiserver guaranteed to send all initial events before any other watch events?

`resourceVersionMatch` to `NotOlderThan` value.
If you provided `resourceVersion` in the query string without providing a value or don't provide
it at all, this is interpreted as a request for _consistent read_;
the bookmark event is sent when the state is synced at least to the moment of a consistent read
from when the request started to be processed. If you specify `resourceVersion` (in the query string),
the bookmark event is sent when the state is synced at least to the provided resource version.

### Example {#example-streaming-lists}

An example: you want to watch a collection of Pods. For that collection, the current resource version
is 10245 and there are two pods: `foo` and `bar`. Then sending the following request (explicitly requesting
_consistent read_ by setting empty resource version using `resourceVersion=`) could result
in the following sequence of events:

```console
GET /api/v1/namespaces/test/pods?watch=1&sendInitialEvents=true&allowWatchBookmarks=true&resourceVersion=&resourceVersionMatch=NotOlderThan
---
200 OK
Transfer-Encoding: chunked
Content-Type: application/json

{

>   "type": "ADDED",

Reviewer 3: _(aside)_ Did you consider adding a new event type for the synthetic init events? I could imagine a case where a controller might want to use WatchList to initialize it's cache, but also takes a special action when resources are added that shouldn't be performed on the initialization events.

Author: Yes - it's not a good idea.
Because technically watch with RV=0 was supported from k8s 1.0 version and that also had ADDED events. Changing that would introduce more confusion or incompatibility than it's worth it.

And the bookmark give you exactly what you need in case you want to handle them differently (which btw isn't clear - we changed reflector to it (I mean optionally now) and having ADDED is good enough).

assume bookmarks are returned at any specific interval, nor can clients assume that
the API server will send any `BOOKMARK` event even when requested.

> ## Streaming lists {#watch-bookmarks}

Reviewer: This will shadow the `## Watch bookmarks` heading earlier.
I have a suspicion this was my suggestion; anyway, I suggest:

```suggestion
### Streaming lists {#watch-bookmark-initial-events}
```

The new text becomes part of “Efficient detection of changes”.

---

If we need to reframe that 2nd-level heading, perhaps to be “Data streams”, “Streamed collection data” or something else more generic, then we can do so.

Is there a case where a client does a **watch** with `sendInitialEvents` other than to end up running the watch? (Is there a reasonable case where client might want to abort the watch as soon as it sees the first `BOOKMARK` event?)

Author: That wasn't your suggestion - it was @tallclair 's one.

But I messed it up - it should be for "watch bookmarks" section. Should be fixed now.

> Is there a reasonable case where client might want to abort the watch as soon as it sees the first BOOKMARK event?

There might be a reasonable usecase where we actually want to stream the data without storing everything in memory. So yes - there are usecases (although we don't want to endorse them yet - probably in the future).

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.27" state="alpha" >}}

On large clusters, retrieving the collection of some resource types may result in
a significant increase of resource usage (primarily RAM) on the control plane.
In order to alleviate its impact and simplify the user experience of the **list** + **watch**

> pattern, Kubernetes v1.27 introduces as an alpha feature the support
> for requesting the initial state (previously requested via the **list** request) as part of
> the **watch** request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pattern, Kubernetes {{< skew currentVersion >}} allows you to fetch the contents of a collection
as part of a **watch** request. See [Efficient detection of changes](#efficient-detection-of-changes)
to learn more about watches in Kubernetes.
As a client, you can either continue the **watch** to subscribe to further event updates, or you can
use this mechanism purely as a more efficient alternative to **list** a collection.
```

Provided that the `WatchList` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/)

> is enabled, this can be achieved by specifying `sendInitialEvents=true` as query string parameter

Author: The 1.27 version is mentioned 2 lines above (in addition to the header of the section).  I don't think it makes sense to constantly repeat it - for me as a reader it would be more annoying than useful.

> is enabled, this can be achieved by specifying `sendInitialEvents=true` as query string parameter

Reviewer: I'm proposing that _this_ (and the feature state shortcode, which lots of readers don't fully notice) is where we make the requirements clear.

That way, we're documenting in one place both:
- the version requirement
- the need to explicitly enable a feature gate

My experience suggests putting these details in 2 places is likely to lead to more GitHub issues telling us the docs are wrong (even when the docs are strictly correct and have been misunderstood).

in a **watch** request. If set, the API server starts the watch stream with synthetic init

> events (of type ADDED) to build the whole state of all existing objects followed by a

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
events (of type `ADDED`) to build the whole state of all existing objects followed by a
```
